---
layout: post
title: 'Building and Deploying Jekyll Sites with Azure DevOps and Azure Storage Static Site Hosting'
tags: [AzureDevOps, CICD]
featured_image_thumbnail: /assets/images/posts/2019/jekyll-build/header_thumb.jpg
featured_image: /assets/images/posts/2019/jekyll-build/header.jpg
---

When I decided to get back into blogging after having ditched my previous effort a few years back, I had two initial thoughts.  First, I wanted to take a look at options were available for blogging platforms.  Second, I wanted to start my post off with something more interesting than the obligatory "here's how I built my blog" post.  Well, as of this post, I'm 1 for 2 in those goals as I'm about to run you through how I'm deploying and hosting my shiny new blog using <a href="https://jekyllrb.com/" target="_blank">Jekyll</a>, <a href="https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/devops/" target="_blank">Azure DevOps</a> and <a href="https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/storage-blob-static-website" target="_blank">Azure Static Website Hosting</a>.
# Hosting Options
Before I retired my previous blog, I was using <a href="https://wordpress.com/" target="_blank">WordPress</a> on a VPS host.  Despite having absolutely zero PHP experience, this worked out pretty well for me.  It was intuitive to setup and easy to configure to meet my fairly minimal needs.  One of my desires with my new blog was to host it on <a href="https://azure.microsoft.com/" target="_blank">Microsoft Azure</a>, since my day job involves helping Microsoft's customers build great things on Azure.  It turns out there are two options for running WordPress in Azure.  First, there's an option in the <a href="https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/blog/how-to-host-a-scalable-and-optimized-wordpress-for-azure-in-minutes/" target="_blank">Azure Marketplace</a> that provisions WordPress on Azure App Service, Azure Storage and hosted MySQL.  This is a super easy way to get WordPress up and running on top of highly scalable PaaS services.  The other option would be to provision one or more virtual machines and install WordPress and it's dependencies yourself.  There's obviously trade offs to both of these approaches, but for me, since I'm paying for hosting myself, and, let's face it, I'm pretty cheap, both of these options are out of my budget.

Another option I considered is <a href="https://ghost.org/" target="_blank">Ghost</a>.  Ghost is really appealing to me because it's built on NodeJS, something I have at least some experience with.  Ghost could easily be hosted on a VM in Azure, and while there isn't an official Ghost offering in the Azure Marketplace, a quick search will show that there are at least a few options for running on Azure App Service.  Again, like with WordPress, both of these hosting options are have their place, but for me, they're outside of my budget.
## Static Site Generators
One drawback of platforms such as WordPress and Ghost is the dependency they have on their database and server-side frameworks.  To ensure we stay ahead of security vulnerabilities, we need to stay on top of new releases and security patches for things like PHP, our database and any dependent libraries.  With this in mind, and considering that a CMS like WordPress or Ghost really brings along a lot more capabilities than I really need, I was interested in exploring static site generators as an option for blogging.

For the uninitiated, a static site generator is a tool that takes static content and a set of templates as input and outputs plain old HTML, images, JavaScript and CSS.  This means that when it comes to serving your site, you don't need any server-side frameworks or databases.  You simply need a web server to serve that static content.  There are a number of different static site generators available, but I investigated two in particular, based on the recommendation of colleagues.  
### GatsbyJS
<a href="https://www.gatsbyjs.org" target="_blank">GatsbyJS</a> is a static site generator based on React.  At this point, I should disclose that I am not now, nor do I aspire to become a front-end developer.  Unfortunately, it was on this point that GatsbyJS lost me.  Browsing through their documentation, it pretty quickly got into writing GraphQL queries and editing markup.  I'm sure GatsbyJS is a fine framework and that there are templates available that minimize the need to learn things like React and GraphQL, but based on what I saw in their docs, I decided to move on to another option.
### Jekyll
The next, and as it turns out, final option I looked at is <a href="https://jekyllrb.com/" target="_blank">Jekyll</a>.  Jekyll is based on Ruby and takes markdown as input.  Within about 10 minutes, I was able to spin up a Jekyll based site locally.  That includes the time to find a custom theme and downloading/installing Ruby on my Windows laptop.  Based on this experience, Jekyll absolutely met my unspoken laziness requirement, that is, not having to learn a whole new tech stack to spin up a blog.
## Hosting a Jekyll Blog
Chances are, if you're familiar with Jekyll, it's in the context of hosting content on <a href="https://pages.github.com/" target="_blank">GitHub Pages</a>.  